Abstract— The era of big data is surrounded by plenty of challenges, concerning aspects related to data quality, data management, and data analysis. Plenty of these challenges are met in several domains, such as the healthcare domain, where the corresponding healthcare platforms not only have to deal with managing and/or analyzing a tremendous quantity of health data, but also have to accomplish these actions in the most efficient and secure way possible. Towards this direction, medical institutions are paying attention to the replacement of traditional approaches such as the Monolithic and Service Oriented Architecture (SOA), which deal with many difficulties for handling the increasing amount of healthcare data. This paper presents a platform for overcoming these issues, by adopting the Microservice Architecture (MSA), being able to efficiently manage and analyze these vast amounts of data. More specifically, the proposed platform, namely beHEALTHIER, offers the ability to construct health policies out of data of collective knowledge, by utilizing a newly proposed kind of electronic health records (i.e., eXtended Health Records (XHRs)) and their corresponding networks, through the efficient analysis and management of ingested healthcare data. In order to achieve that, beHEALTHIER is architected based upon four (4) discrete and interacting pillars, namely the Data, the Information, the Knowledge and the Actions pillars. Since the proposed platform is based on MSA, it fully utilizes MSA’s benefits, achieving fast response times and efficient mechanisms for healthcare data collection, processing, and analysis.

Keywords— Healthcare, Electronic Health Records, Data Collection, Data Analysis, Health Policies, Microservices

I. INTRODUCTION One of the biggest challenges that the computer industry currently faces is finding an efficient approach to handle big data in terms of analysis, storage, and security in various domains, such as business, governance, finance, insurance, etc. These challenges become even greater when this data derives from the healthcare domain, due to the complexity and the importance of ingesting, manipulating, and analyzing the continuously growing data. Based on Statista, there have been major investments in big data within the healthcare industry, where for 2018, it is estimated that there were 4.7 billion U.S. dollars worth of investments made into big data, whereas this number is expected to increase to 7.0 billion U.S. dollars by the end of 2021. At the same time, nowadays 92% of the providers of various healthcare solutions are promoting the use of digitization for healthcare facilities. Experts predict a massive acceleration of digital technology in healthcare, including the use of tools for cloud computing and data management. Based on these numbers, the existing healthcare platforms not only have to gather a vast amount of data concerning patients, medical examinations, prescriptions, and lifestyle, but also have to perform complex computational tasks upon this data, in order to efficiently provide the users with the required medical results. Apparently, the aforementioned tasks do not leave any room for latencies during the platforms’ operations.

However, most healthcare platforms currently in use have, seemingly, some performance issues. This is due to the fact that they are based on software architectures such as Monolithic, which is typically composed of tens or hundreds of business functions, being deployed together in one software release. Based on the continuous evolvement of Information and Communication Technologies (ICT), the Monolithic concept is more than outdated, with Service Oriented Architecture (SOA) having replaced it. SOA is well established, and most healthcare platforms are based on it. Nevertheless, the exponential growth of healthcare data has now revealed the inability of SOA-based platforms to efficiently exploit this data. As a result, it is of vital importance that a new, more agile, and more flexible architecture should be adopted in all these platforms. A representative example of such kind of architecture is the Microservice Architecture (MSA). The latter proposes the creation of functionality-specific services that are isolated, independent and communicate with each other using lightweight protocols to provide speed and flexibility.

**Having said that, the proposed platform of beHEALTHIER, utilizes the MSA to effectively manage and analyze healthcare data, thus enabling policy makers to build health policies out of collective knowledge that derives from this data. The latter is gathered from heterogeneous data sources, being then integrated into a newly proposed kind of Electronic Health Records (EHRs), namely the eXtended Health Records (XHRs) that are able to integrate and store different kinds of healthcare data. These XHRs are then used to construct discrete XHRs’ networks based on common characteristics that the XHRs may have. The XHRs networks are then analyzed, in order to finally assist policy makers in creating policies for the public health. To achieve that, the platform has been designed based on four (4) different pillars, the Data, the Information, the Knowledge, and the Actions pillars, that are used for supplying the platform with the appropriate data, processing it, analyzing it, and illustrating its results, correspondingly. To successfully complete these tasks, every pillar includes different components, where each component is implemented as a microservice. The latter are able not only to communicate with other components of the platform, but also to operate as a standalone entity. Hence, beHEALTHIER totally exploits and takes advantage of the concept of the MSA towards efficiently collecting, processing, and analyzing big data, highlighting the novelty of using MSA in contemporary healthcare platforms.

**This paper is organized as follows. Section II analyzes the related work regarding the general concepts of software architectures, focusing on SOA and MSA. It also includes examples of healthcare platforms that are based on SOA, thus highlighting their issues and the reason why beHEALTHIER embraces the use of microservices. Section III describes the general architecture of the beHEALTHIER platform, including a brief description of each component, accompanied by the different types of users that can exploit the platform. Finally, Section IV summarizes the overall work of beHEALTHIER and provides insights regarding the following steps.

II. RELATED WORK

A. Software Architectures

Generally speaking, software architecture refers to the fundamental disciplines followed to design and implement software systems. There are multiple types of such architectures, including the Monolithic approach, the SOA, and the MSA. A vast number of companies have already migrated to MSA or plan to do so in the near future, making MSA a rapidly growing trend. When it comes to the MSA, there is a lot of debate going on by the scientific community, regarding its definition. Most researchers seem to agree that MSA is an architectural approach that appeared in the recent years and emphasizes on self-management and the lightness of softwares. That kind of approach proposes the creation of autonomous software units called microservices, which can be deployed, scaled, and tested independently, having a single responsibility. However, researchers argue whether MSA should be considered as a brand-new type of software architecture or not. Some of them hold the view that MSA forms an entirely new architectural style, whilst some others believe that MSA is just an implementation of SOA, all of them, however, agreeing that both architectures have similarities. Nevertheless, claiming that MSA is undoubtedly a subtype of SOA does not seem to be entirely accurate, since SOA relies mostly on a heavyweight middleware, while microservices do not.

Either way, MSA is a fast-growing trend nowadays. The basic principles of this architectural style, as stated, are bounded context, size and independency, while the pros and cons of MSA also seem to be under debate. It is widely accepted that MSA has the upper hand when it comes to maintainability, testability, and availability. As it is depicted, SOA uses a heavyweight middleware for messaging, transport, security and transform operations among the different existing services, as well as a single database for storing data. On the contrary, microservices are independent with each other, they do not use a heavyweight middleware for communicating, whereas they are utilizing different databases to store their data. As a result, it is easier to be monitored, maintained and tested. They also offer scalability and updateability. However, being consisted of separate independent software, also means that this software has to be ultimately integrated. The latter is widely believed to be the greatest disadvantage of MSA.

B. Applied Software Architectures in Healthcare

Nowadays, there are plenty of companies that have migrated to the MSA, coming from different domains (e.g., social media, ecommerce, entertainment, etc.). Some of the most known ones refer to Amazon, eBay, Netflix, and The Guardian. Those companies have millions of subscribers worldwide, which is the main reason why they have chosen to adopt and use microservices into their systems. However, especially in the healthcare domain, there seems to be a lack of platforms that use the MSA, thus not exploiting its widely accepted offerings.

Most of the currently proposed healthcare research initiatives follow the SOA. In deeper detail, Omar et al. proposed a SOA-based e-health monitoring system for tracking patients remotely. Gnapathy et al. designed a SOA-based framework that performs data mining upon data coming from patients’ sensors, in order to lead to proper clinical decisions. Rocha et al. suggested CAALYX, which is a SOA-based framework for preventing and early detecting chronic diseases, by collecting real time data and storing it into cloud. Yeh et al. proposed BSNCare+, which is suitable for Internet of Things (IoT) devices, alerting patients whenever an abnormal measure occurs. Lee et al. used SOA for implementing a platform for providing personal healthcare. As for the SOA healthcare platforms that are used to perform big data analysis, the authors proposed SoA-Fog, which is a secure SOA-based framework for performing big data analytics in health data. Gancheva et al. also used SOA for creating a platform capable of performing big genomic data analytics. Moreover, the authors used SOA for creating a framework that collects and analyzes data from wearable biosensors.

However, choosing SOA comes to a cost that is highly related to the disadvantages of SOA itself. As stated above, in SOA, services are not entirely independent. This may result in greater load and response times, especially when handling big data. The lack of independency may also cause management issues, since the services exchange many messages while executing tasks, which might overwhelm the overall system. Healthcare systems usually have to manage healthcare data in real time and offer immediate results to the users. Response times must be reduced to the minimum value and data management has to be the most efficient possible. Thus, there is a great need for adopting MSA in the healthcare domain.

To address this gap, this paper proposes beHEALTHIER, a platform for building health policies out of healthcare related data coming from different data sources, from different patients. This data is used by the platform for performing complex machine learning algorithms whose results are exploited by the policy makers to construct and evaluate policies for the public health. With that being said, late response times and management issues cannot be tolerated throughout the platform. As a result, beHEALTHIER is based on MSA, where all the platform’s components are implemented as independent units (i.e., microservices), integrated suitably, and eradicating known issues that other SOA healthcare platforms have.

III. PROPOSED APPROACH

A. beHEALTHIER Architecture

beHEALTHIER is a platform that creates eXtended Health Records (XHRs), a new suggested type of EHRs that integrate different types of data such as health, social care data and data from clinical signs of each patient. Based on the constructed XHRs, beHEALTHIER is able to create different networks of XHRs, exploiting them in order to finally construct effective health policies. In order to achieve the abovementioned, beHEALTHIER develops and integrates various innovative mechanisms and services towards the successful management of heterogeneous healthcare data (i.e., historical health data from healthcare providers, laboratory data, data from wearable devices, application data, etc.), so as to use it effectively for the formulation of health policies. The platform’s implemented architecture improves the possibilities of utilizing health data through the integration of technologies that allow not only their holistic analysis based on knowledge and experience extracted from similar data sources, but also their continuous evolution through the integration of new diverse data sources. This approach offers added value in health policy formulation by shaping populations with similar characteristics.

The platform consists of four (4) main pillars, the Data, Information, Knowledge and Actions, where within each pillar there exist discrete microservices that serve specific functionalities. In short, the Data pillar is responsible for supplying the platform with the appropriate data, whilst the Information pillar is responsible for processing the collected data, and feeding it into the constructed XHRs. The Knowledge pillar converts this data into knowledge and provides all the needed data analysis results and XHRs networks (i.e., clusters). The latter are finally exploited in the Actions pillar, where a web interface is provided in order to display the analytics’ results, and construct the emerging public health policies. To this end, it should be noted that for each microservice the input is the data coming from the platform’s database, while each output is also stored in it. What is more, all the developed microservices are containerized with Docker containers, even if MSA does not dictate the use of containers. More accurately, the Data pillar, is furtherly divided into two (2) separate sub-pillars, the Data Entry and the Gateway of the beHEALTHIER platform. The Data Entry can receive as an input either data coming from heterogeneous data sources (both known and unknown sources) or data coming from healthcare providers’ data warehouses (known sources), whereas the acquired data can be historical healthcare data, real time healthcare data, statistical rows, and epidemiological studies. For all the aforementioned cases, for each data stream, whether it comes from a known or an unknown source, the Gateway solves all the challenges related to both connectivity and communication issues. It ensures the essential “interpretation” of the acquired data, converting it into JSON format, and finally storing it into the beHEALTHIER database. The latter has been chosen to be a NoSQL database, and more specifically a MongoDB, as huge amounts of data must be managed, including unstructured, semi-structured and structured data.

As soon as all the actions of the Data pillar are successfully completed, the data is sent from the Gateway to the Data Reliability microservice of the Information pillar, as it is important to have confidence for all the collected information. Hence, the Data Reliability microservice ensures that any new collected raw data will be completely cleaned, by applying various techniques (i.e., validation of data structure and data type based on the provided schema, prediction of missing values using KNN, and removal of duplicates using priority queue algorithm), so as to identify and remove possible errors and inconsistencies. By the time that this action gets complete, the Data Reliability microservice sends back to the beHEALTHIER database all the cleaned data. Then, the Data Interoperability microservice is applied, which in essence, is responsible for the reception of different types of data, which may be represented by diverse data formats, and converts it to the most commonly used HL7 FHIR standard. Hence, the collected data is formulated both in a cleaned and in an interoperable format, being ready to be used by the XHRs Creation microservice to construct the corresponding XHRs. Based on the collected data, the XHRs may include patient-related health data, incorporating not only prevention (e.g., vaccination, diet, and lifestyle) and healthcare (primary and secondary) data, but also additional data identified as key health determinants such as welfare data, environmental data or data from social networks. Thus, an XHR can contain four (4) categories of data: (i) health and social data recorded by the patient and her environment, (ii) social care data collected by social actors, (iii) objective data from clinical signs that are recorded and transmitted in the form of biomarkers from medical devices connected to the patient (e.g., activity trackers, smartwatches, wearables, etc.), and (iv) healthcare data (primary and secondary) including data stored by health professionals. What is worth mentioning is that an XHR refers to a specific patient, and by the time that an XHR is created for a patient, the latter remains in the beHEALTHIER database so as to be filled in with additional future data of the same patient. Thus, an XHR can be considered as a patients’ holistic health record, including all the aforementioned categories of data for each patient.

Afterwards, in the Knowledge pillar, the XHRs Networks microservice takes as an input all the constructed XHRs, in order to identify possible correlations among them. The latter is implemented by retrieving by the beHEALTHIER database the content of each XHR and analyzing it, so as to identify similarities within the different XHRs and formulate relevant clusters. To achieve that, different data mining techniques are implemented, exploiting both clustering and classification algorithms. Inside this pillar there is also the Predictions microservice that is responsible for constructing predictions, by applying different machine learning techniques. More specifically, each constructed prediction assesses the applicability and effectiveness of health policies, their variants and combinations in specific sections of the population, taking into account social information and spatio-temporal properties. In addition, the creation of such predictions assesses the most appropriate treatment for each patient and thus, overcoming a given health problem. Likewise, the Risk Analysis microservice in this pillar, produces information about specific health risks at population level, helping to identify the low, medium and high risks. Moreover, it provides information about a patient’s risk to develop a specific health problem at a given time.

Finally, the Actions pillar consists of the platform’s web interface that is responsible for presenting all the produced analytical results, coming from the Knowledge pillar. More specifically, a user is able to visualize the results of Risk Analysis, Predictions and XHRs Networks, through the provided interface. This component is also responsible for policy modeling through the Formulation of Health Policies component, which takes as an input existing health policies, and forms new policy structures based on the entries of the policy makers and the results of the implemented analytics, finally storing them into the beHEALTHIER database. What is more, through the provided interface, the Provision of Personalized Care is achieved, in the sense that, based on the results of the provided analytics, conclusions are drawn at individual level, for personalized care for chronically ill and elderly people.

It should be noted that there exists an extra component outside of the abovementioned pillars, covering however all of them, namely the Security and Privacy component. The latter oversees the creation of a secure and private environment, by providing specific regulations as for the security and privacy policy, access management and GDPR of the platform.

B. beHEALTHIER Users

Various users can offer their data and exploit the results of the beHEALTHIER platform. Hence, all the information provided by the platform can be exploited by different types of users that may exist in the healthcare ecosystem. As depicted, the beHEALTHIER platform may interact with four (4) different types of users, the Citizens/Patients, Healthcare Professionals, Policy Makers, and Researchers.

In short, as for the Citizens/Patients, the latter are able to provide their healthcare data to the platform, which may originate from various devices they use (e.g., mobile phones, smartwatches). This data is managed by the platform for the creation/enrichment of the respective XHRs, the XHRs Networks, and subsequently, the application of various data analysis techniques, after having been properly processed in the Data Reliability and Interoperability microservices. On top of this, they may recover the results of the data analytics carried out by the respective microservices. That kind of information is provided visually through the platform’s web interface. With regards to the Healthcare Professionals, they provide other citizens’ healthcare data to the platform, which may have originated from various medical sensors (e.g., oximeters, sphygmomanometers), always having the corresponding citizens’ consent to freely provide their healthcare data. Additionally, Healthcare Professionals are able to recover patients XHRs and the results of the data analytics, where all this information is provided visually through the platform’s web interface. As for the Policy Makers, they provide information to the platform regarding existing public health policies, which can then be exploited by the platform’s data analysis tools. Likewise, they retrieve information from the platform that can lead to the creation of new public health policies, exploiting the results of the beHEALTHIER analytics tools. Finally, regarding the Researchers, they are able to provide a wide range of citizens’ healthcare data to the platform, in order to apply the provided analytics tools of the platform upon it. Like Healthcare Professionals, Researchers must have citizens’ consent to use their data. They also provide results of old data analyses that can be used for the training of the data analysis mechanisms of beHEALTHIER. Furthermore, they can retrieve the results of the data analytics carried out by the respective microservices.

IV. CONCLUSIONS

Nowadays, the amount of data is growing exponentially. As a result, it is imperative that information systems should be implemented based on software architectures that are capable of managing this data efficiently. Healthcare information systems currently in use, fail to efficiently manipulate this data since they use architectures, such as SOA, which tend to have performance issues while handling big data. beHEALTHIER makes use of MSA, offering a solution to productively handle healthcare big data. Each component of the platform is implemented as an independent microservice that has specific responsibilities, eliminating known drawbacks of other architectures such as late response times and increased load throughout the platform.

Taking into consideration all the aforementioned, we are planning to continue the specification, design, and analysis of the beHEALTHIER platform. This overall work is still a work in progress for which many design iterations have been repeated, considering the evolving big data and microservices challenges. To this end, it must be noted that the main functionality of each component (i.e., microservice) has been already implemented, and we are currently working upon a first evaluation and testing of the proposed architecture, exploiting healthcare data coming from diverse data sources. Based on the results that we have captured so far, it is within our future goals to add new data sources from which beHEALTHIER will be able to gather data. We also aspire to improve the design of XHRs to comprise more types of healthcare data. Furthermore, we aim to enrich the data reliability component by using top-notch algorithms for cleaning raw data coming from diverse sources, as well as upgrading the techniques that XHRs Networks use. Accordingly, machine learning algorithms used in the data analysis components will be updated to offer accurate predictions to the platform’s users.