Unified Searching Service for Electric Big Data

LiFang Gao, QiMeng Li, YangYang Lian, PengPeng Lv, WenFang Zhou*

Department of Information Communication, State Grid Hebei Electric Power Company, No.10, Fuqiang Street, Yuhua District, Shijiazhuang City, Hebei Prov. China

Abstract

For Electric Management Information System (EMIS), different types of data are continuously generated from many sub-systems. It is essential to integrate these different data resources to perform better analysis and more accurate calculation about the Power Grid system. However, existing EMIS is combined with separate platforms, and the data formats are various. In this paper, we propose a unified searching service for EMIS based on the integration of electric big data. In the system, different sources are firstly configured to export their data into the Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS). Then indexing is generated and the keywords of different data are generated by word2vec. Finally, a Mapreduce based processing, searching, and recommending system is developed. The microservice technology and Hadoop framework is applied to implement the proposed framework and the experimental results indicate the proposed method can effectively create a unified search service for the electric company.

Keywords: Electric Management Information System; Searching; Data integration; Big data

1. Introduction

Through the construction of the Electric Management Information System (EMIS), the electric company has established several business systems and built a centralized management platform for big data. The existing platform has already created centralized storage, cumulative management of many types of business systems. The total number of data records has reached half a billion, and the total storage capacity is over 400TB. The number of records increases was around 15 million/month, and the data storage increased near 8T/month. However, these data are still stored, managed, and utilized in a non-structured platform from different business systems. The value of data centralized management cannot be fully developed, and the full view of data is not formed. Data acquisition across business is difficult, especially the lack of fuzzy query of the content of unstructured data, which leads to the situation that “people are difficult to find data”. This is a problem that we need to solve in the big data era.

The existing unified search system currently only supports news search and does not have the intelligent search function of unified search, relationship search, recommendation, etc. The existing unified search system relies heavily on foreign manufacturers' products and does not support Chinese word segmentation.

Therefore, in the face of the difficulty of finding knowledge due to massive data, it is very necessary to carry out the work of improving information retrieval capabilities. The proposed framework should make full use of the existing systems, and consider business needs and user experience. It should solve the problem of multi-source information decentralized search across systems and services; solve the problem of scattered information being connected and displayed in multiple angles through certain associations; solve the problem of passive retrieval. In this paper, we proposed a unified searching service for the electric company through knowledge management and portal integration. The experiment results indicate the efficacy of the proposed framework. The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 gives the related work on blockchain. Section 3 explains the proposed framework in detail. Section 4 describes the implementation of a demo system and shows the experimental results. Finally, Section 5 concludes the whole paper.

2. Related Work

2.1. Integrated Management System

Along with the development of Management Information System (MIS), it has been applied in different applications in a large company such as the electric company, university or hospital. To integrate different MIS for a better analysis of the whole company, Nunhes et al. (2019) introduced the concept of IMS (Integrated Management System). Puchol et al. (2017) proposed an integrated management system reference model for higher education institutions. Carvalho et al. (2019) also given an example of data integration in the hospital Information system. Isabel et al. (2018) suggested a unified knowledge system to support the scientific community by integrating resources from different providers. Xu et al. (2019) developed a holistic and collaborative information integration framework for safety monitoring that collects, analyzes, and disseminates safety information. Jun et al. (2019) described a unified mechanism design of a data management system for nuclear power stations.

To implement the integrated management system, Bounagui et al. (2019) proposed a unified framework based on cloud computing to evaluate and integrate IT management models. Wang et al. (2019) suggested an industrial big data integration and sharing framework based on Fog Computing. Barafort et al. (2017) implemented an integrated risk management of IT settings based on ISO standards.

2.2. Unified searching service

For an integrated information system, a unified searching service is an essential function to support different analyzing applications. To implement unified searching, knowledge integration is necessary. Li et al. (2019) proposed an IoT-CANE (Context Aware recommendation system) to identify a suitable configuration of devices, software, and infrastructures in the context of user requirements. Keisler et al. (2019) presented a system for performing visual

search over billions of aerial and satellite images by defining unified visual similarity using 512 abstract visual features generated by a convolutional neural network that has been trained in aerial and satellite imagery. Bing et al. (2018) developed the well-known Word2vec to perform a unified web search from a large-scale query log. In this paper, we also applied the feature analyzing and word embedding to improve the performance of the searching service.

3. Methodology

3.1. Basic framework

The technical framework of the unified searching system is based on the independent and controllable software infrastructure of the national network. It encapsulates the main components of the search engine, data analysis, and display to provide a one-stop retrieval service based on unstructured text semantic analysis through the cooperation of each component. It has the functions of cross-service retrieval, dynamic association retrieval of data, automatic pushing of unstructured data based on user's domain of interest, which can be used by business systems such as knowledge management and portal in combination with business needs, and data-level access can be realized by integrating with unified authority system and business system. Identify the identity and data rights of the end-user, and filter the search results.

3.2. Renovation of identity authentication module

The technical framework of one-stop search system mainly includes the following levels:

Data access: The first batch of one-stop search includes enterprise portal system, collaborative office system, knowledge management system, and IRS system, so as to standardize the company's intranet news, office transceiver, knowledge experience, project documents, and form interrelated business data sets. As the above systems have been integrated with unstructured platforms (now integrated into large data platforms), this project will no longer carry out system integration alone, but directly obtain relevant document data and metadata from large data platforms to complete data access.
Data storage: The data storage layer provides centralized storage and services for three main types of data. Firstly, unstructured data (corresponding to the original document) will continue to be stored in the distributed storage of the large data platform. During data processing and online browsing, the original data will be transferred to local temporary storage through the interface with the large data platform, and then deleted after relevant processing; metadata related to document context semantics, the behavior log data, and business model data used to support precise search are stored in the form of relational data. The infrastructure adopted is SG-RDB, an autonomous and controllable relational database in the national network. One-stop search system preprocesses the original document data (text extraction, etc.), participles, and analyses them. It is constructed as a full-text index along with the key business metadata of the document.
Processing analysis: Data processing and analysis layer is the core part of the one-stop search system, which runs through the link from original data processing, data analysis to search recommendation. In the data preprocessing part, the original data in unstructured documents are extracted into a plain text stream, and the text content, keywords, and summary information are further extracted. At the same time, the original documents are converted into document formats that can be browsed online. In the data analysis part, machine learning technology is applied to characterize the documents, while in the data analysis part, the text content, keywords, and summary information are further extracted. Finally, the full-text index of documents is constructed, and services such as full-text retrieval, correlation ranking, and joint query are provided by the full-text search engine. It can also form an associated recommendation based on the user's browsing history and domain of interest.
Application demonstration: It provides user-oriented comprehensive retrieval, Association retrieval, automatic recommendation service, and combines with the business model to realize knowledge aggregation, timeline display, and various visual statistical charts. It also integrates with the Intranet Portal system to realize one-stop retrieval based on Intranet Portal. The application display layer is developed based on J2EE Web technology, mainly using HTML/CSS/JS, JSP, and part of HTML5 and Flex visualization display technology to ensure the compatibility of the system with mainstream browsers and enhance user experience.
4. Implementation and Results

To better implement the technical framework and support the functional and non-functional requirements of the one-stop search, we will focus on infrastructure integration, data set privilege control, indexing, and search process, including the following key schemes.

4.1. Design of Real-time Search

According to the non-functional requirements of the one-stop search system, it needs to provide quasi-real-time search capability (in high concurrency, integrated search for 1-2 seconds, associated search, automatic push for 2-5 seconds). According to the working principle of the search engine, there are two most time-consuming parts in the process of searching: creating and querying the index, namely steps 2 and 3 in the following figure.

4.2. High-Reliability Design Scheme

Reliability is one of the key non-functional indicators of a one-stop search system. According to demand, the goal of system stability is that the failure-free running time should account for more than 99% of the total running time. To achieve this goal, two guarantees are proposed: high availability of local system and application-level disaster preparedness. This section focuses on the high availability design of local systems based on micro-service architecture. Micro-service architecture is a new architectural style that has been developed in recent years and has been widely adopted. Among them, micro-service is relative to the traditional "single application". The so-called single application is to treat a complete application as a development unit. Traditional enterprise applications usually consist of three parts: client interface (composed of HTML and Javascript, accessed by browser), database (composed of many table components, a general and interrelated data management system), and server application. Server-side applications process HTTP requests, execute domain logic, retrieve and update data in the database, and send them to the client using appropriate HTML views. Server-side applications are complete and executed at a single logical level. Task changes in the system will be redistributed to server-side applications and a new version will be released. Micro-service architecture also uses component libraries, but it divides software into services and considers them to be the main form of organization. We define component libraries as components that relate to each other in programs and use in-memory calls, and services as components that communicate with each other between processes using, for example, Web request services or remote calls.

In a one-stop search system, the main application modules, including data processing, data analysis, and search engine, are implemented as micro-services within the system.

5. Conclusions

In this paper, we create a unified searching service to support different types of applications in EMIS. The proposed framework is implemented with Hadoop in which HDFS is used to store the data and Mapreduce is used to perform parallel indexing and searching. We demonstrate unified searching and create a reliable design schema to ensure the safety of integrated data. Also, the microservices are employed to integrate the data from different services. The experiment results indicate that the proposed unified searching service can improve the operation of EMIS.